# Hooks: `useState`

In this section, we'll cover the simplest [hook](https://react.dev/reference/react), `useState`, and how it can be used to store and update information.

To get started, we'll dive into this counter example, going through it line-by-line.

```jsx
function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0)

  const increment = () => setCount(count + 1)
  const decrement = () => setCount(count - 1)

  return (
    <div>
      <span>Current Count: ${count}</span>
      <button onClick={increment}>+</button>
      <button onClick={decrement}>-</button>
    </div>
  )
}
```

### Tuples

```javascript
const [count, setCount] = useState(0)
```

The first thing we notice here is the `const [count, setCount] = ...`. If this syntax is unfamiliar, we are simply using [ES6 Array Destructuring](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/Destructuring_assignment). `useState` returns an array with two items: the first is the value of the state, and the second is a function you can use to update that state, triggering a re-render. The above could be rewritten as:

```javascript
const countState = useState(0);
const count = countState[0];
const setCount = countState[1];
```

Typically, we use arrays for storing a list of values. We often don't know what the length of that array will be. In this case, we know that `useState` will *always return an array of two items*, the first being the state, and the second being the updating function (this follows the [_getter_ and _setter_ paradigm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutator_method#JavaScript)).

When using array destructuring, we're able to choose the name of any variable we pull from the array. When working with `useState`, this means we can assign the state and and our updater function to whatever we choose:

```js
const [username, setUsername] = useState('joseph')
const [zipCode, setZipCode] = useState(90065)
```

## Initial State

Back to this line:

```js
const [count, setCount] = useState(0)
```

We see that we call `useState` with a value of `0`. This argument is the initial state - in this example, `count` will be assigned to `0`.

## Calling the update function

Moving on to the next two lines:

```js
const increment = () => setCount(count + 1)
const decrement = () => setCount(count - 1)
```

Here, we are creating two new functions that will call `setCount`. These functions are then assigned to the buttons as handlers:

```jsx
return (
  <div>
    <span>Current Count: ${count}</span>
    <button onClick={increment}>+</button>
    <button onClick={decrement}>-</button>
  </div>
)
```

When we click the `+` button, the `increment` function is called, which executes `setCount(count + 1)`. When `setCount` has been called, the component will re-render, and our `count` will have been increased by one:

```js
const [count, setCount] = useState(0) /* same as before, except useState will return an updated count */
```

So, when an update function is called, *the new state will be whatever was supplied to that function*. This sounds pretty straightforward (and it is!) - but this works a little differently from Class components. Keep this in the back of your mind during the exercise, and we'll cover it in the next section.

### Exercise 1: Clicker Hook

1. Create a new React app called `counter`. Replace the contents of App with the above example. 
2. Play with the initial state.
3. Add a new `+10` button that adds 10 to the `count`.
4. Prevent the count from going below 0 or above 10.
5. (bonus) Disable the `+` button when the count is 10, and the `-` button when the count is 0. (hint: you can disable a button HTML element with the `disabled` attribute: `<button disabled={true}>...</button>`)

## Summary

That's it for `useState`! It's super simple, and great for tracking basic pieces of your state. 
