# React State

## Learning Objectives
 - Learn about state and forms
 - Learn how to update state
 - Learn how to make one source of truth
 - Learn about events and use onChange and submit

## Form Inputs / Controlled Components

HTML elements, like `input`, maintain their own state (this is their default behavior as just plain HTML: as you enter or delete characters in an input you see those characters change).

We'll need to give React control over our inputs, so that React's `state` will maintain the state of our inputs. That way there is one source of truth for our data (React `state`).

 Let's add an `input` inside of a `form` to our shopping cart application from one of the previous READMEs:

 ```jsx
return (
  <div>
    <h1>Big Time Shopping</h1>
    <form>
      <input type="text" />
    </form>
    <ul>
      {
        products.map((product, index) =>
          <li key={index}>{product.name} | {product.price} | {product.description}</li>
        )
      }
    </ul>
  </div>
)

```

We can still type into this field, but we need to connect it to React.

Let's expand state to hold our input value:

```js
const [products, setProducts] = useState(data);
const [inputValue, setInputValue] = useState('');
```

Now let's tie it into our input

```jsx
return (
  <div>
    <h1>Big Time Shopping</h1>
    <form>
      <input type="text" value={inputValue}/>
    </form>
    <ul>
      {
        products.map(product =>
          <li key={index}>{product.name} | {product.price} | {product.description}</li>
        )
      }
    </ul>
  </div>
)
```

If we've done it right, we won't be able to type in our form: We have set the state of the input field's value to be an empty string and currently we have no way of updating it.

React is optimized to only re-render elements that have changed/been updated. That is one its key features. We don't update state directly, rather, we use a function called `setState` to update state.

Let's code it out.

We'll rename our `inputValue` state to `name`, to clarify its purpose:

```jsx
function App(){
  const [products, setProducts] = useState(data)
  const [name, setName] = useState('')
  /* etc... */
```

And we'll call that function using the `onChange` event (we covered event listeners/handlers in unit 1 with vanilla js - the syntax is a little different but the principles are the same).  One of the most common is `onClick`, but there are others that listen for mouse over, key up, key down, or form submission.

```js
return (
  <div>
    <h1>Big Time Shopping</h1>
    <form>
      <input type="text" value={name} onChange={(e) => setName(e.target.value)}/>
    </form>
    {/* etc... */}
```

If you wanted to accomplish this without using an inline function, we could create a `handleChange`. If we were to use this, we'd replace the function in the `onChange` with `handleChange`:

```js
const handleChange = (event) => {
  setName(event.target.value) 
}

/* etc...  */
      <input type="text" value={name} onChange={handleChange} /> // or {(e) => handleChange(e)}
```
Dope!

### Updating more than one input field

It's very likely that our app will have more than one input field. We could write a `handleChange` function for every field. But that seems like a lot of work.

What would be better would be to follow the proper guidelines for creating inputs.[ Which is to use `label` elements.](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/label) Creating forms properly, by including labels and possibly [fieldsets](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/fieldset), helps improve accessibility - especially in the case of screen readers.

[React and Web Accessibility](https://reactjs.org/docs/accessibility.html)

When we properly update our HTML with labels, we'll also end up with each input having an `id`. We can match this `id` to the matching key in `state` and this will then make updating our `input` fields much easier.

Keeping track of just `name` doesn't really help our store. Let's add the ability to edit a product's properties:

```js
  const [products, setProducts] = useState([])
  const [name, setName] = useState('')
  const [price, setPrice] = useState(0)
  const [description, setDescription] = useState('')
```

Now, let's add a label element with the attribute `htmlFor` - the value will match the key for the input. **Note** just like `class` is a reserved word in JavaScript, so is [`for`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/for) So we have to use the React syntax (camelCase) for the attribute, which will then get rendered into the proper attribute in the HTML.

Then, in the input element, we'll add an `id` that will match the `for` value.

Let's update our product name input first:

```jsx
<h1>Big Time Shopping</h1>
<form>
  <label htmlFor="name"></label>
  <input type="text" value={name} onChange={(e) => setName(e.target.value)} id="name"/>
</form>
```

### Add more fields


Let's add inputs for price and description:

```html
<form>
  <label htmlFor="name">Name</label>
  <input type="text" value={name} onChange={(e) => setName(e.target.value)} id="name" />
  <br />
  <label htmlFor="price">Price</label>
  <input type="number" value={price} id="price" />
  <br />
  <label htmlFor="description">Description</label>
  <input type="textarea" value={description} id="description" />
  <br />
  <input type="submit" />
</form>
```


### 10 Minute Practice
- On your own, try writing the handlers for the Price input and the Description input.

### Preview and then submit

To demonstrate state and rendering, we'll make a little preview box. Let's put this after our last input and before the start of our `ul`:

```jsx
<div>
  <h2>Preview our new item</h2>
  <h3>Name: {name}</h3>
  <h4>Price: {price}</h4>
  <h5>Description: {description}</h5>
</div>
```

Take some time to make sure that as you update each input field, each preview gets properly updated as well.

When we are ready, we'd like to submit this new item and see its name, price, and description show up in our list.

### Add a new item

Once we are happy with our new item, we want to submit it.

Upon submission, we'll add our new item object into our array of products.

Remember, form submits, by default, refresh the page. So the first thing we'll have to do is add an event listener for the submit event. Then we'll prevent the default behavior.


```jsx
const handleSubmit = (event) => {
  event.preventDefault()
  console.log('you prevented the default');
}
/* etc... */
    <form onSubmit={handleSubmit}>
```

You should see your `console.log` and it should stay. If you see it for a moment and it disappears, then you have not yet prevented the default behavior of submit.

We'll make a new object with the correct structure for our products array. Then we'll add it to our array using ES6 syntax, rather than using a method like `push`, as recommended in [the official React documentation](https://react.dev/learn/updating-objects-in-state#why-is-mutating-state-not-recommended-in-react):

```js
const handleSubmit = (event) => {
  event.preventDefault()
  const newItem = {
    name: name,
    price: price,
    description: description
  }
  setProducts([...products, newItem])
}
```

### One More Nice Touch

It would be nice to have the form reset once we have submitted our new item:
```js
const handleSubmit = (event) => {
  event.preventDefault()
  const newItem = {
    name: name,
    price: price,
    description: description
  }
  setProducts([...products, newItem])
  setName('')
  setPrice(0)
  setDescription('')
}
```

### Updating State

Currently we're accessing the `products` via the state getter. Another way we can set the state is by passing a callback function to our state setter, which gives us a free parameter—the current value of the getter:

```js
setProducts(prevProducts => [...prevProducts, newItem])
```
